#### 1 / INTRODUCTION
**

In previous chapters, I have discussed unfolding mainly from a formal point of view, discussing the way that centers grow, and how they grow in such a way as to allow coordination and adapta-tion among the parts of the emerging whole as it becomes a building.

But, of course, there is an enormous sub-ject, not yet dealt with at all: **the question of the functional origin of a building, and the definition of the functions that are to go into it. In any sane process which is able to make living structure in buildings, giving proper attention to the functional basis of the build-ing-to what people need, and want, and desire, in order to make themselves comfort-able - is paramount. For a building it is the essence of its worth.**

I have not discussed this subject earlier, be-cause the way that functional information enters the building process, cannot be well understood without a grasp of the geometrical aspects of the formative process. Even the question of what the building does, and how well it does it, can be understood properly only in the context of the geometry.

We have now had a sufficient preparation in geometry and structure, to begin a detailed discussion of the functional basis of a building.

**

#### 2 / STRUCTURE-PRESERVING TRANSFORMATIONS AS THE ORIGIN OF FUNCTION
**

At the beginning of every building design pro-cess, it is necessary to get an idea of what is going to happen in the building, how it is going to work. But this activity of defining functions ahead of time is far more subtle than it might seem.

As I have said in Book 1 (chapter 11, pages 403-39) that all functions, when they are work-ing well in a building, are associated with living centers. This means that all the "functions" which are to be defined for a building need to be expressed as rules for making centers. And, above all, the choice of these centers is vital: To a very great extent, the finished project will be defined, controlled, in its behavior and its feeling, by the choice of key centers which are to appear in it.¹

Simple examples of traditional function and its centers. A rose trellis around a cottage door is simple enough: It forms a center, it creates enjoy-ment through color, smell, and it enhances the love of living things. Though it is small, and the center is not high among the more significant centers in the built environment-still, the choice of this one type of center has a huge effect on house and village. It is just one center, and a small one; but it has a huge effect on what life is like in that place. In another case, a repeating center and its functions may be very large, visi-ble, and highly significant in the way that func-tion and behavior are made to change. Dulles airport for Washington, D.C., was largely de-fined by the mobile lounges which Eames and Saarinen invented as a new way of getting from the airport to the plane. It was a new kind of center that transformed the way an airport works.

Such examples show us how the quality of human culture is embodied in the repeating cen-ters which are current in a place. Indeed, as we know very well, the needs which people have in buildings are richly modified by culture. A house or an Arab family in Morocco, for a Japanese family in Japan, for an English family, a Russian family are all quite different things. In any particular society, the centers which are recog-nized are specific, and identify a particular (culture-borne) way of life. The way of life of Americans in Fort Lauderdale, the way of life of Trobriand islanders in a Trobriand village; the way of life of Indians living in a high density part of Delhi- each has its own complex system of centers. In each of these cases, the way of life, the existence, is defined by centers that are peculiar to that culture.

So, for instance, the Trobriand islanders in a village typically arranged their houses in a circle around a common area.³ The chief's house at one point of the circle, with storehouses on either side, created the axis of the village. Collective yam stores were placed at points around the inner cir-cle, on either side of the axis, leading to the chief's house and main common house. This was the way the world made sense for Trobrianders, was com-fortable, and was consistent with their culture, their values, their beliefs. It was all embodied, summarized, in the centers that appear in this typical layout of a village. The archetypal centers, which define the classic Trobriand village, are the physical and geometrical embodiment of a whole-ness which will then support, reflect, sustain, the essence of their culture.

Thus, the task of defining centers, for a new building, or for a neighborhood, is one of the deepest and most significant kinds of work which can be undertaken, in trying to establish a new way of life, and a physical environment which supports that way of life.

**The process of choosing or defining func-tional centers, if it is to be part of a living process, must itself derive, then, in some fashion, from the existing wholeness.** Like the elaboration of geometry itself, the pre-operational phase when the centers-to-be are being defined must be drawn from the existing wholeness by structure-preserving transformations.

What exactly does this mean? It means, mainly, that the centers that are to be injected into a new building project-the generic entities or patterns which are to be the building blocks of the project, and which are to define it — must come in large part from the human culture where the project is happening and therefore, of course, from the culture that exists.

When we begin a building project, our clues about what should be built, what should be done next, must come not only from the land but from society, too, and from the culture where this is being done. We are faced with the empty canvas, and we puzzle about what to do. It is the human family which makes us build a house, it is the concept of transporta-tion and community which makes us seek roads and sidewalks; it is the way that people are in their custom and behavior, which provides the all-important physical subtleties. So, the response to the land, even if it is to be structure-preserving, a true unfolding process, must be rooted, always, in the whole, in the cultural and human whole and the land and the ecologi-cal and natural whole and the physical whole-ness of that place which forms the context of our work.

**
#### 3 / PATTERN LANGUAGES
**

About twenty-five years ago, my colleagues and I invented a class of theoretical systems modeled on the generative systems used in traditional so-ciety. We called them pattern languages. **A pat-tern language is essentially a way of defining ge-neric centers, and then using them, sequentially, in design projects. The entities we called patterns were - albeit in an early formulation - some-what similar to the entities I now call centers.**

One might say that every pattern which was de-fined under that theory was, in effect, a rule for making or partly making some important type of center, necessary to the life of a living human environment.

The theory of pattern languages was first put forward in A PATTERN LANGUAGE and in THE TIMELESS WAY OF BUILDING. Secondary statements of the theory were published in HOUSES GENERATED BY PATTERNS, A PATTERN LANGUAGE WHICH GENERATES MULTI-SERVICE CENTERS, and THE OREGON EXPERIMENT.

There are, in addition, a great number of recent publications by many other authors who have used these ideas and built on them during the last twenty years. Many are in the field of archi-tecture. In recent years a rich and varied addi-tion to the literature has come in from computer scientists, writing in the field of software design.

The essential ideas of pattern language the-ory are the following:

I. In traditional cultures, successful envi-ronments were always built by using pattern lan-guages. They showed people how to make an al-most infinite variety of buildings by combining and recombining the patterns, and contained within the process a modest guarantee that the buildings would be successful. Hence the great variety and beauty of buildings built by tradi-tional societies.

2. Each culture had its own pattern lan-guage. The pattern languages reflected differ-ences from culture to culture, and often nearly embodied the culture as a whole, in the form of rules which defined the spatial structure of the built environment.

3. The patterns were, for the most part, based on human needs, understanding, neces-sity. They reflected the deep practical daily con-cerns of people and were, as rules, expressed in a form which made it possible to put these things into the built environment in an immediate, practical, and effective form.

4. At the same time, although patterns vary from culture to culture, and while human needs vary and are highly specific in different human cultures, there is a core of material - a central invariant structure - which is common to all cultures. A portion of this invariant core — or at least a sketch of such a thing - is described in A PATTERN LANGUAGE.

This much of the theory is descriptive.

But for the most part, the main purpose of the pattern language theory was not descriptive, but prescriptive. We discovered that it is possible to create pattern-language-like systems, artificially.

  

That is:

5.It is possible to create pattern languages for our own time, which, like traditional lan-guages, embody knowledge, cultural subtlety, human need, and empirical information about the structure of living environments, in a form which may then be used to generate living centers by a combinatorial unfolding process.

6. It is possible to invent and create new pattern languages, artificially, by trying to see what new patterns will solve problems that exist in a given context. Although these may be new, in the sense that they are newly defined, many of them may, obviously, be versions of ancient patterns, familiar in different cultures, but so deep that in some form they are still relevant to our new era and new settings.

8. The objectivity of the patterns is context-sensitive, and always includes a built-in reference to the context for which that pattern works.

9. The patterns, because of their explic-itness, allow discussion, debate, and gradual im-provement of the material.

10. The artificial language will work well only to the extent that it embraces a whole - that is to say, to the extent that it comprises everything that needs to be said about a given building situation, and that the various patterns it contains work together as a whole system, which accounts for all morphology that is re-quired to design, plan, design, or make, a com-plete building of that type and its immediate surroundings.

II. These artificial languages, like tradi-tional languages, can then be used to steer pro-cesses of design and building, just as traditional languages played that role in traditional society.

12. For any new building project it is neces-sary to construct such a language, merely to pro-vide a clear functional basis for the character and organization of the building. The language that is written down, at the beginning of a project may be invented from scratch, composed of known languages that have been re-combined, or may be a modification of a known language developed earlier. This will vary, according to the degree that the project is new, not yet fully understood, or old and familiar.

One might say that every new pattern de-fined under the theory of pattern languages is a rule for creating a certain type of (new) living center, needed and appropriate in a given range of contexts. More precisely, one may express relationship of the two theories like this: Each pattern is a rule which describes a type of strong center that is likely to be needed, on a recurring basis, throughout a particular environment or class of environments. Further, a pattern not only describes a recurring center, but also describes a relation between other generic centers. The pat-tern both describes a generic center, and describes a generic relation among other generic centers.

But it must be remembered that the pattern de-scribes a generic center, not a particular center.

In this sense the pattern is not so much like an element in an erector set, but more a rule for making a certain kind of center capable of mak-ing an infinite number of particular centers of the same type, whenever they are needed.

**
#### 4 / PATTERNS AS GENERIC CENTERS AND THE EVOLUTION OF NEW CULTURE
Let us now ask how we may go about creating a system of patterns or generic centers to provide the elements for a given building process?
A living process only rarely creates living centers from scratch. In most cases, the living pro-cess makes use of solutions or partial solutions to previously encountered problems, in the form of pre-established coded schemes, or rules for mak-ing instances of generic centers. The process then uses these generic centers again and again as it encounters different real-world situations. In or-ganic nature, this is familiar. A gene is an organ-ism's way of remembering how to form previously successful adaptations in ensuing generations of new organisms. The gene essentially remembers, and allows re-use of, a generic solution to a recur-ring problem. In architecture, traditional pattern languages played the same role. When we build a house, or a door, or a path, or a garden, these words describe worked-out culturally defined generic centers - pattern-like concepts which can be generated in a thousand forms to make actual cen-ters in the world. The good environments in tradi-tional society could be built because people had pictures of what worked; these pictures were agreed upon, and used and re-used, over and again.
Memorized nuggets of solution, like the pat-terns in traditional society, like genes in the growth of organisms, are necessary to any com-plex adaptive system and its process.' But in ar-chitecture the use of re-usable patterns does not only occur in living process. After all, damaged 20th-century building process, too, had its pat-terns-for example, many principles of traffic, building, and planning that were (and are) in use. The trouble is, of course, that many of these present-day patterns did not lead to creation of living structure, but rather the reverse because they were based on criteria for success such as profit or insurance or limited managerial effi-ciency, which had little to do with the fitness of the living structure as a whole. For example, the common practice of placing motels and apart-ment buildings over at-grade parking, common in the United States during the 1970s and 1980s, was efficient because it was the cheapest way to do it. But it caused serious damage to the living structure of the pedestrian world and commu-nity fabric.
**The key difference between the patterns which arose in the 20th-century profit-oriented system and those which must accompany a living process, is that in a living process the patterns define types of centers which reinforce, support, bring out the life of the whole.**
For a society to have living processes, atten-tion to the whole must once again become the framework, so that the system of patterns which are used as support for the living process acts together to take care of the whole. Only this will make the living whole a possible outcome.
The crux of the whole thing is that we seek patterns which are good, patterns which will gen-erate life when we create them in a building built in the context we are facing.
In our modern world, where societies are often in flux, the stability and coherence of such a traditional society is rarely found. Instead, peo-ple are usually struggling to create for themselves a system of coherent environmental objects and spaces, in which they can live well, be comfort-able, and feel at ease.
But this means that people must create (arti-ficially) what was taken for granted in traditional society: a system of patterns describing centers which can form the backbone of a new wholeness in a new society. Equally, the ecologists and biol-ogists and forest management people try to create a system of patterns for centers which will pro-vide the underpinning of a living ecological com-munities; educators create patterns for centers like classrooms, seminars, group discussion, in-dividual education, which might provide the un-derpinning of a stable and healthy process of education; transportation experts try to create a system of new effective patterns for freeways, roads, parking. Throughout society people are working to create the basic underpinning of what may be a healthy world, capable of being coher-ent, realized within new building forms; capable of sustaining new kinds of community, family, society. And of course the patterns which are being created and the centers which these pat-terns describe-vary from nation to nation, from village to village, from culture to culture, from subculture to subculture within the mosaic of a modern metropolis like London or Tokyo or San Francisco.
The process of finding these deep general-ized culture-borne centers, discussing them, evaluating them, settling on them, and then applying them to the construction of the world, is a major part of the work of creating any physi-cal part of the world, large or small, collective or private. It is, necessarily, the first and most essential part of the general unfolding process which takes place as we construct our world.


#### 5 / HUMAN CULTURE AS A PART OF PHYSICS

#### 6 / DISCOVERING NEW PATTERN-LANGUAGES: HOW TO DRAW A VISION OF THE FUTURE FROM THE STUDY OF THE PRESENT

#### 7 / A NEW LANGUAGE FOR HOUSES IN PERU

#### 8 / THE TYPE OF OBSERVATION WHICH LEADS TO DISCOVERY OF LIVING CENTERS: SEEKING TRADITION AND SEEKING THE NEW

#### 9 / THE PROCESS OF FINDING A GOOD CENTER

#### 10 / ESSENTIAL CENTERS NOT GIMMICKS

#### 11 / THE SYSTEM OF PATTERNS EMANATES AS A WHOLE

#### 12 / THE EISHIN SCHOOL PATTERN LANGUAGE

In the next (and last) example, I give excerpts from a much longer language, the list of centers for the Eishin school in Japan, constructed be-tween 1983 and 1985. The full list contained about 200 patterns, and defines a way of life for a high school and university.¹4 At our client's re-quest it was different from any existing school in Japan at that time (1981). **We can see and feel, merely by reading the names of the centers and their rough description, that what was going to happen in this new school would be very differ-ent from what we are familiar with.**

**Above all we can see this new way of life as a complete whole. The way it works is completely defined by the list of centers. Thus in all im-portant aspects the life of the new school is con-tained in these centers, and the list of centers de-fines this way of life it its entirety. This gives us tremendous insight into the vast extent to which the life of any given building or building com-plex, is defined by the list of centers which it will contain.**

  

I. GLOBAL CHARACTER

There is an outer boundary which surrounds the site.

Inside the outer boundary, there is an inner boundary which surrounds a smaller area; about one-fifth of the whole site.

The area inside the inner boundary is called the inner precinct. It is a dense area where the school and college have their major buildings.

Between the inner and outer boundary is the outer precinct: an area filled with gardens, sports fields, and various freestanding outer buildings.

The buildings and the site are given their char-acter by stone foundation walls, wood columns, white walls, a few special places with red lac-quered wood, wide overhanging roofs, dark roof surfaces, stones and grass on the ground.

  

2. THE INNER PRECINCT

The entrance to the inner precinct begins at the outer boundary. At a key point in the outer boundary, there is a gate.

This main gate is a building.

From the main gate to the inner boundary, there is an entrance street. The entrance street is flanked with walls or trees, and is extremely quiet.

Where the entrance street meets the inner boundary there is a second gate.

Inside the second gate, there is a public yard. This public yard is formed by a great hall, which forms the main side of the yard.

Beyond the public yard and through a third gate is the essential center of the school and university. This essential center is reached through several layers, which have been described. And it contains further layers and further levels of quietness, within itself.

This essential center is fairly large-itself a world, bounded, within the inner precinct and formed by paths and gates. This essential center contains a large part of the high school and a large part of the university.

Opening from this essential center are those parts of the university and high school which are specialized and separate.

Since the essential center is at one and the same time, the heart and crossroads of the school and university, it has the rough form of a cross formed by crossing paths. Because it resembles the character ta (a cross in a square) we have therefore named it the Tanoji Center.

  

At the crossing of the streets and paths which form the Tanoji Center, there is a smaller cen-ter: This place is the kernel of the busy part of the Tanoji Center.

And, opening from the far side of the Tanoji Center is a higher and most peaceful place that we call the college cloister. This is the inner sanctum of the university, and the most peace-ful place of all. It is chosen to be in a place which invites contemplation.

Also opening directly from the Tanoji Center is the homebase street. The homebase street is a wide, lively, sunny street formed by the indi-vidual home room buildings where the high-school students have their classes.

Opening through gates on another side of the Tanoji Center is a lawn. This lawn, especially for the use of college students, is surrounded by the college buildings, and leads directly to the lake.

The lake is a peaceful place, to rest....

  

A further excerpt from the pattern language gives some of the details:

  

8. INTERIOR CHARACTER

The interior character is warm and subdued: wooden columns, floors and walls in places; pale yellow wall color, comparable to golden chrysanthemums, paper or silk; near-white sliding screens and ceilings.

Floors of many buildings are raised, slightly more than usual, off the ground.

Classrooms have polished wooden floors, or car-pets, and shoes are not worn inside the classrooms.

All homebase classrooms have big windows fac-ing south.

Many rooms have gallery spaces to one side, where light comes in beyond, and shines through screens.

Many walls and other surfaces are wooden, with natural unfinished wood.

The classrooms and other rooms are furnished with very solid wooden desks, which several students share.

In the larger buildings, there are mirrors where students see themselves. 

Outside the buildings, there are often flower beds.

And inside, here and there, throughout the school, there are surprising soft highlights of color, shining out among the subdued colors of at the rest, a figure painted in pale kingfisher blue in one place; a golden yellow iris in another.

  

The full original pattern language which we constructed in 1982 contained about 200 centers.15 These centers, completely governed and defined the life of the school. Even before we had any idea about the physical configuration of the buildings, their shape, or design, or the way these centers were to be made real in space, it was already obvious that the school was going to be given its life to an enormous degree, merely by this list of centers. Regardless of the particular architecture which followed from this list of ge-neric centers, or the way these centers would later be embodied in a real place with real form,

the list of centers alone already defined the essen-tials of the place and its way of life, and its degree of life, to an enormous degree. 

Once again I go to a single detail in this list of centers. One of the patterns in this pattern language for the Eishin school, describes the fact that classrooms are separate buildings, and im-plies, therefore, that it is will be necessary to walk in the rain to go from class to class.

One could have made a different choice, to keep the classrooms together, and to protect stu-dents and teachers from all rain. The key centers in the two cases are these (here again I use small capitals to emphasize the entity-like character of the centers):

A standard Japanese high school contains these patterns:

  

CASE I

ONE BUILDING FOR ALL CLASSROOMS 

CLASSROOMS ATTACHED WALLS OR FLOORS BETWEEN CLASSROOMS 

COVERED PASSAGES PROTECTED FROM RAIN

  

Instead, the new kind of high school formed by our pattern language contains these patterns:

  

CASE 2

SEPARATE CLASSROOM BUILDINGS

EACH BUILDING LIKE A HOUSE

GARDENS BETWEEN CLASSROOMS

PATHS CONNECTING CLASS-ROOMS EXPOSED TO RAIN

  

In what sense is the second list more essential than the first? It is more essential, because it deals with feeling, and at a much deeper level. The sec-ond system of centers is more deeply connected to human feelings as they really are. This large topic is taken up fully in chapter 14.

It is also useful to understand that the sec-ond system is rooted more in the wholeness of the Japanese culture itself. Before we began our work in Japan, the old Eishin school (on its pre-vious site) was arranged like case 1. There was one huge block with many classrooms. But if one examined that wholeness carefully, one could see that within it (the world defined by the case 1 patterns), the truth of the second set of centers (the world defined by the case 2 patterns) lay there, latent, waiting to be derived. The desire for autonomy of different teachers, and different classes was already a real thing in their lives. The enlivening character of the rain on people's faces was even then a real thing, observable in life.

The deadening effect of being in passages all day long was also a real thing, also observable. The peo-centers of autonomous classrooms in the second list were latent in the actual existence of the people and the place as it already was. The centers of Irain on your face and centers of unprotected paths were latent in the actual existence of the people and the place, as it all was. The centers of gardens between classrooms was latent in the ac-tual existence of the people and the place as it ac-tually was then.

**What, then, defines essential centers and distinguishes them from trivial centers? The an-swer, briefly put, is this. The essential centers are those whose presence is already latent in the field - which the heart of the living structure that is already there - which summarize, or en-capsulate, the essence of the real life which is go-ing on.**

Of course, in a period of history where peo-ple like to stress the arbitrariness of all things, such an idea may seem doubtful or impossible to accept. But the crux of all life is, nevertheless, the difference between recognizing the essential thing and separating it from the trivial thing.

#### 13 / THE DEEP NATURE OF PATTERNS AND PATTERN LANGUAGES

#### 14 / LOOKING FOR GLIMPSES OF ETERNAL LIFE

### 14. DEEP FEELING

#### 1 / INTRODUCTION

#### 2 / DEEP FEELING MUST BE THE CORE OF LIVING PROCESS

#### 3 / A PANEL OF YELLOW BLOSSOMS

#### 4 / GRASPING THE FEELING OF A FISHPOND AS A WHOLE

#### 5 / CHOOSING AMONG DOORS ACCORDING TO DEGREE OF FEELING

#### 6 / THE BLACK COLUMNS 

#### 7 / THE FORMLESS BUT SPECIFIC FEELING OF THE WHOLE

#### 8 / DESIGNING A MUSIC CABINET

#### 9 / FEELING AS THE ORIGIN OF THE ARTISTIC WHOLE

#### 10 / WILL DEEP FEELING REALLY BE POSSIBLE?

#### 11 / CLASSROOMS IN THE RAIN

#### 12 / A NEW WHOLE EMERGES: LIFE V.MECHANISM THE ESSENCE OF UNFOLDING WHOLENESS

#### APPENDIX / THE HARD WORK OF CREATING AN ENGINE THAT PRODUCES GENUINE FEELING

**