1 / DEEP FEELING AS THE GUIDING PRINCIPLE

The revolutionary consequences of chapter 14 can hardly be exaggerated. If living processes, guided by feeling for the whole, and guided by feeling, were to shape all acts of construction in society, then everything, nearly, that we know about modern society would be changed. Above all - and what I wish to say now is not a small thing - it means that people would have a self-awareness, a knowledge of reality and wholeness as it is, quite different from the ignorance of inner feeling we came to accept as normal in the 20th-century.
 The idea that feeling - above all feeling - should become the main anchor of the huge, hundred-million-variable process which creates life on Earth, seems hard to take seriously.
 Above all, it seems hard to implement. We live in a world of computer process, banking,  strictly controlled procedures. How is it possible to contemplate a world in which the freedom exists, that could allow natural unfolding - the unfolding governed by deep feeling - to control processes of such magnitude?
 Yet I do mean this seriously. Let me make three small points.
  (1) By feeling, the reader must remember that I mean adherence to the whole. It is not an idiosyncratic touchy-feely kind of thing, but serious, holistic connection with the whole, which provides a wholesome feeling in the actor.
  (2) Next - a feeling-guided process was typical in most human societies, during much of the Earth's history. That alone should give one pause in dismissing it too quickly. Why should it not also  be possible for us?
  (3) What I have called a feeling-based process - the fundamental process as I have described it - is demonstrably necessary for the production of living structure.
 Some writers - Lynn Marguils or James Lovelock among others - migth say that a texture of living structure on the Earth is required for Earth's survival. They argue for biological reasons, and I argue for architectural reasons, that living structure is a necessary feature of a reasonable, surviving, nourishing world. If we want an Earth which is covered with living structure then, according to what I have argued in this book, this **wholeness-based form of action** must, indded, become the norm.
  But perhaps most interesting, most inspiring, underlying the material of this book there is the vision of a world which is guided by feeling. Instead of technology, feeling: At the beginning of the 21st century, even the biologically oriented views of complexity theory, are chiefly guided by interaction of complex variables, mathematical attractors in phase space, and os on. The power of the techniques that have been elaborated  is startling. But it remains true that human beings, and human nature, are intuitively more in tune with feeling than with mathematics. Our humanity - humanity itself, our sympathy for one another, and for ourselves - all has its origin in issues concerned with archetypal feeling. From this point of view, the importance - in my view - of the techniques I have described, is their capacity to create a living world which is rooted in human feeling, because that will create a world in touch with us, with our true nature, with our humanity. The idea that **feeling itself can become both criterion and instrument** - that what is done, no matter how large or how small, can become personal, connected to the personal self of all human beings - and that this process then opens the door to a new form of society. That is truly revolutionary. That can shake the world.

2 / REPAIRING THE WHOLE

I hope I have succeeded at least this far: That the reader of this book has begun to appreciate the possibility that in the future, a new form of building and planning process must come to exist worldwide, in the sphere of human creation, and in the disciplines by which we shape the Earth and our built world upon the Earth.
Nature is able to create living structure by smooth sequences of recursively applied structure-preserving transformations, applied again and again and again to wholeness which exists on the surface of the Earth. The laws of physics, and chemistry, and hydromynamics, and the laws of complex evolution - now called non-linear dynamics or complexity theory - all of them their core suggest the same process: **The wholeness which exists gives way, incessantly, to a next wholeness, which preserves the structure of the previous one.** This happens even in the process of destruction, in the process of simplification, death, pruning. It happens, too, in the more complex two-level process we call genetic evolution.
 The key is biology. In this book I have proposed a process, able to propagate life in our built and natural enivronment, which is very similar to the way that biological processes propagate plant and animal life on Earth. A key and vitally important point is this: **The pressure towards life in the local system is congruent with a pressure towards life in the whole.** There is no conflict between the life of the parts and the life of the whole. **Every living process seeks, at every single moment, to increase the life of the parts and the life of the whole, together.**
  Autonomous and purely physical processes of this class created organic life on Earth in the pre-human era. Simliar, but human-inspired processes created the beauty of traditional towns and villages in the first human era. Similar, but more conscious processes can now be used to make buildings, rooms, streets, gardens, public squares, neighborhoods, landscape, and wilderness, even objects of daily use in our world. That, I believe, is what will come to pass in the second human era which is now just beginning.
  In principle, living processes of this class might then also be used to create everyghing else. They might, for instance, one day even be used as the processes for building human institutions, famaily discussions, for choices, for decisions of value, even politics. But that is, perhaps, looking a very long way into the future.
 Of course, there are hundreds of thousands of specific social processes which may have the ability to increase the life of the whole. Certainly, I am not insisting that there is any one super-process, or only one kind of viable process. Rather, I am specifically insisting that there is only one class of living processes - albeit a very large class indeed - and that any particular process must, if it is to be a good one, belong to that class.
  When we engage in building design, or building construction, town-planning, or agriculture, or engineering, or placing highways, when we build buildings, when we give permission to the construction of buildings, when we consider plans for land-use - in all these cases too, the same unfolding process which has created living structure in nature, could - if allowed to - also create living structure in our environment.
   By inventing and re-inventing versions of the fundamental process in appropriate social forms, and applying these of process to all acts of making and building and repairing, this worldwide operation then contains within itself, the seeds or core of the biological unfolding process that occurs in nature, now applied to human society. Throughtout human society, human beings who use it will be capable of healing and remaking the ravaged  Earth.

3 / THE BIOLOGY OF OUR FUTURE WORLD

People used to say that just as the 20th century had been the century of physics, the 21st century would be the century of biology. The origin of this thought was that while the processes of physics that dominated our 20th-century technology were fascinating and unusual, they were often one-dimensional, linear, monochromatic, involving fairly small numbers of variables. The creation of life, on the other hand, is a highly complex process, involving thousands or millions of variables, working in subtle cooperation. It was felt that, as understanding of biology increased, so our mental world, and our ability to understand and control biological process by subtle means, would increase, so that we would gradually move into a world whose prevailing paradigm was one of complexity, and whose techniques sought the coadapted harmony of hundreds, or thousands of variables. This would, inevitably, involve new technique, new vision, new models of thought, and new models of action.
 I believe that such a transformation is starting to occur. I also believe the repeated application of the fundamental process to the built world will inevitably have to be part of such a transformative society. In saying this, I must underline my belief that living processes belong to the furure, not to the past. Although 20th century social processes were so different from what I contemplate, and did not yet contain the wherewithal  to create living structure (except for the small islands of exception I have cited) - there is now a natural swell in people's minds, a sea-change, and a change of intention, so that the turn towards generation of living process is, perhaps, one of the signal marks of the turn of the millennium, of people's changed awareness, of their hope.
  Our future, as we begin to see it now, contains a vision of an entirely new kind of human process: **A process, like the process of biology, which is attuned to human nature, makes more sense of human feeling and human common sense.** In this process - and it applies to every step that is taken in society, whatever people are doing - you move forward in small, tiny steps. Each **step accomplishes something concrete and good - one center at a time.** **Each step is taken forward, judged, by the impact it has on the whole.** **We are continuously evaluating the whole for its deep feeling, for its usefulness, for the support it gives to human experience.**
   This process, then, is potentially remarkable. As versions of such process are worked out for different situations in society, they may, ultimately, replace bureaucracy and the machinelike organization of large corporations and government. **It is a process in which individuals do what is necessary, and what they can do, moving everything forward one satisfying step at a time.** 
 You may wish to say that this is dreaming, even impossible. But that, I think, would only be the echo of the dying 20th century that talks, still, in our heads. It is possible. A few examples I have given in this book begin to make that clear. Other more extensive examples in Book 3 make it far more clear, and show how this process can, indeed, generate an entire living world.
  Above  all, we know that it must be possible on theoretical grounds. We know it because this is the process by which the biological world of plants and animals has already been created. Late 20th-century research on complex systems by Holland, Kaufmann, and others, showed how very complex systems with enormously rich and complex state-space have been built up, repeatedly, throughtout biological history, by the process of unfolding, and by small structure-pre-serving processes, which go step by step, yet reach astounding results in the whole.
   I believe that structure-preserving processes of the general type I have defined will be extended far beyond the bounds of architecture. Other preliminary demonstrations in the sphere of complex systems lead to the same conclusion.  What I am pointing to makes sense as a way forward in the complex world of computer programming and software development, where the inticacy and internal architecture of systems has been shown to deveop best under these kinds of impetus. It works in the world of biology. It works in the world of technology. And it will work in the world of architecture itself.
 A world made in this way is truly a new kind of world. I do not know, for sure, that traditional society reached its goals by these means. What I do know, and am certain of, is that the society of the future, the long future of men and women on our planet, will - must - inevitably be carried forward by this kind of process which allows the nourishment of the individual to happen at the same time that vast, and highly technical developments occur. 
  **The small, step-by-step process is not only the best way to build the architecture of a complex system, from the point of view of adaptation. It is also the most satisfying, the most nourishing - because it creates, at each step, something that makes us - the makers - feel more wholesome, something that makes us feel alive while we are doing it.** It is nourishing, it is fun, it is productive, it is efficient. **And, of course - best of all - a similar healing effect also takes place in the whole.** Since it is the whole we are always looking to at each step, the whole which is  transformed and made to have a deeper feeling, a lovely feeling consistent with everyday longings - then the whole, the great architecture of the shole, will in the end serve us, give us a kind of world (born of just such a process) whi

4 / THE FAR-DISTANT FUTURE