1 / INTRODUCTION
I believe we can understand how "life" is made in buildings, and I offer in what follows a lan-guage within which we can begin to describe the phenomenon.
In order to understand life as a phenome-non, it is necessary to define something which I call "the wholeness" and also certain crucial entities which I call "centers," the building blocks of wholeness. These concepts-and therefore the chapter too-are rather abstract. However, I must ask the reader to try to grasp and use these concepts, because the wholeness as I define it, and the centers I shall define as the building blocks of wholeness are, in my view, the indispensable tools needed to understand life. With these definitions, we shall be able to see the way that life comes about (chapter 4), the structural features which all life has (chap-ter 5), the nature of function and ornament(chapter 12). Allow these pages to prepare the groundwork for our ability to understand life as a structure.

2 / THE IDEA OF WHOLENESS
Intuitively we may guess that the beauty of a building, its life, and its capacity to support life all come from the fact that it is working as a whole. A view of the building as a whole means that we see it as part of an extended and undi-vided continuum. It is not an isolated fragment in itself, but part of the world which includes the gardens, walls, trees, streets beyond its bound-aries, and other buildings beyond those. And it contains many wholes within it- also un-bounded and continuous in their connections. Above all, the whole is unbroken and undivided.
This rather obvious idea, though we may assume it to be true, does not yet have a precise counterpart in our professional or scientific analysis of buildings. As a general idea, whole-ness has been widely discussed by many writers in the 20th century: it is one of the main themes of contemporary thought.' In physics, the local behavior of an electron is affected by the larger configuration of the experiment in which it moves. The local behavior of a gravitational particle is affected by the large-scale gravita-tional field that is created by the particles.³ In biology, Hans Spemann's experiments have shown how the growing cells in an embryo are affected by their position in the whole. In neu-rophysiology, Karl Lashley's experiments on the engram led to his discoveries that any particular memory is encoded not at some locus, but somehow throughout the whole. In medicine, J. S. Haldane's discussion of the lung and his explanation of the impossibility of drawing any definite boundary around the organism showed that there is an inseparable quality in which or-ganism and environment are bound together and exist as one whole. In cosmology, there is Ernst Mach's principle: the idea that the gravi-tational constant, G (and hence the force of gravity), is somehow a function of all the matter existing in the universe. Recent work on the overall ecology of Earth has even shown bene-fits in regarding the whole planet as a single organism.³
**In all these examples, the wholeness is the important thing: the local parts exist chiefly in relation to the whole, and their behavior and character and structure are determined by the larger whole in which they exist and which they create.**
Although wholeness has, in this intuitive sense, played such a role in contemporary thought, no one has shown how to represent wholeness. We can talk about wholeness, we can be aware of the necessity of seeing things in their wholeness- but no one has yet formulated a way of understanding just what this wholeness is, in precise terms. We have not been able to represent the whole, or even to isolate, in precise mathematical language, what we mean by the whole.
Most artists and architects know, intuitively, that buildings also work primarily as wholes, and that the built world must therefore also be seen in its wholeness. But again as in the other cases from the recent history of science - we do not yet have the intellectual tools which show us how to do it. We do not yet have a precise model of a structure we might call "the whole-ness" of the built world, or any clear picture of the way this "wholeness" might then contribute to the behavior of the buildings and spaces, what happens there, how it affects us. Nor do we know why it would make sense to say that it is only accurate to see a building working "as a whole."
**After many years of thinking, I believe that I have been able to define, in precise language, what we mean by the wholeness of a given situa-tion. The fundamental idea is that we can define wholeness exactly as a structure.** This structure is defined in mathematical language in appendix 1. It is a rather complex structure, analogous in some ways to the underlying structures defined in topology. In the following sections I shall try to explain this idea in informal language, by means of examples.

3 / AN EXAMPLE OF THE WHOLENESS IN A SIMPLE CASE
The general idea is that the wholeness in any part of space is the structure defined by all the various coherent entities that exist in that part of space, and the way these entities are nested in and overlap each other.
To come to grips with this idea, I start by considering a very simple structure, and examin-ing it from the point of view of its wholeness. On the right is a sketch of a blank sheet of paper.
Then I place one dot on it. Although the dot is tiny, its impact on the sheet of paper is very great.
The blank sheet of paper is one whole, one kind of wholeness. With the introduction of the tiny dot, the wholeness changes dramatically. Its ge-stalt changes. We begin to experience a subtle and pervasive shift in the whole. The space changes throughout the sheet of paper (and not only where the dot is), vectors are created, dif-ferentiations reaching far beyond the dot itself occur within the space. As a whole, an entirely new configuration has come into being, and this configuration extends across the sheet of paper as a whole. Any reasonable description of wholeness must capture this subtle and pervasive effect. But how is it to work?
What is the configuration which exists after I place the dot? It may be described like this: around the dot, there is a kind of halo. Where the dot has been placed, a larger entity of some kind is created. Also, on each side of the dot, passing the dot tangentially, rectangles of white paper become visible, as further 'latent' entities (see diagram on next page). There are four of these rectangles, and where they cross four other rectangles are formed in the four corners of the sheet (again, see diagram). These corner rectan-gles are formed by the overlap of the other rec-tangles, but are also induced by the presence of the dots. In addition, there are rays visible: four white rays going out from the dot parallel to the sides and forming a cross; and four other rays going from the dot towards the four corners.
These four rays are not all equally strong. Their relative strength depends on where the dot is on the paper.
Therefore, including the main entity of the sheet itself, there are at least twenty entities cre-ated in the space of the paper by the dot. Just what these entities are, is not yet clear, but they are zones, visible as wholes in some fashion. All we can really say is that when we place the dot, these zones become marked in some way, they become visible, they stand out. In some fashion they become coherent, or differentiated, where before they were not. Although the precise na-ture of these entities is not yet clear, the thing that matters is that they have become more visi-ble, marked, stronger. In order to visualize the configuration, it is helpful to visualize its structure diagrammati-cally. We simply list those segments of space which are at the top of the list of relative strength as entities: 1. The sheet itself. 2. The dot. 3. The balo around the dot. 4. Bottom rectangle trapped by dot. 5. Left-hand rectangle trapped by dot. 6. Right-hand rectangle trapped by dot. 7. Top rect-angle trapped by dot. 8. Top left corner. 9. Top right corner. 10. Bottom left corner. 11. Bottom right 12. The ray going up from dot. 13. Ray going down from dot. 14. Ray going left from dot. 15. Ray going right from dot. 16. The white cross formed by these four rays. 17. Diagonal ray from dot to nearest corner. 18. Diagonal ray from dot to next corner. 19. Ray from dot to third corner. 20. Ray from dot to furthest corner.
**The basic idea of the wholeness, as I define it, is that these stronger zones or entities, to-gether, define the structure which we recognize as the wholeness of the sheet of paper with the dot. I refer to this structure as the wholeness, or W.** The formal, mathematical definition of wholeness, expressing it as a system of overlap-ping entities, is given in appendices 1 to 3.

4 / THE ORIGIN OF THE STRENGTH IN ENTITIES
What is the origin of the "strength" that makes few special segments stand out as coherent entities to create wholeness? Their strength and centeredness come from a combination of factors that all depend on the overall configuration of the space.
these are In the example of the sheet with a single dot, we have some centers at the corners zones of space which are highly differentiated.
The large rectangles which "fill" the page on the four sides of the dot are the largest symmetrical chunks of space which exist without running into an edge; they are the largest symmetries left intact by the presence of the dot. It is their ho-mogeneity which marks them. The dot itself is marked, of course, because it has a physical dif-ferentiation of color. The lines forming rays from the dot to the corner are created again by local symmetries focused on the two points that form the ends of each ray.
We can begin to give general rules which will identify the zones of space that stand out as centers in any given configuration. For example:

- The sets which appear as entities are often locally symmetrical-but not always. 
- The entities are usually bounded: that is, at their edge, there is often a sharp change of structure.
- Some of the entities are marked by an internal center where there is another change of conti-nuity near the middle of the center itself.
- There is a simplicity and regularity about these sets which marks them as wholes, and makes them function as entities.
- They are often relatively homogeneous across their interior, compared with the surrounding space.
- There is a topological connectivity in them which marks them as compact.
- They are usually — not always — convex.

This list of characteristics is incomplete, but it begins to suggest the kinds of features which cause the coherence of a segment of space to occur. ¹0 Later (chapters 4 and 5) we shall see that more complex entities are formed in far more complex ways.
The entities which come into existence in a configuration are not merely cognitive. They have a real mathematical existence, and are ac-tually occurring features of the space itself. They may be established mathematically according to the relative hierarchies of differentiation in the space. They are mathematically and physi-cally real.
And they have different degrees of strength.

5 / THE CONCEPT OF A CENTER
Let us now consider the nature of the entities from which wholeness is built. We may consider any configuration in the world, a building, a street, a room full of people playing cards, a crowd of people, a forest. Each has its wholeness.
By that I mean that there are visible within that thing, a huge number of entities, at different scales, formed very much in the ways I have de-scribed, and that the totality of these entities with the way they are nested constitute the wholeness of that thing.¹¹ We may think of these entities as parts (as they may sometimes seem to us) or as local wholes or sub-wholes. But, as I have illustrated in the case of the sheet of paper and the dot, these parts and entities are rarely pre-existing. They are more often themselves created by the wholeness. This apparent paradox (seeming paradoxical only because of the simple-minded way in which it is expressed) is a funda-mental issue in the nature of wholeness: the wholeness is made of parts; the parts are created by the wholeness. To understand wholeness we must have a conception in which "parts" and wholes work in this holistic way.
To have a consistent way of talking about these entities, during recent years, I have learned to call them all (whether parts or or local wholes or hardly visible coherent entities), “centers.”
What this means is that each one of these enti-ties has, as its defining mark, the fact that it ap-pears to exist as a local center within a larger whole.
It is a phenomenon of centeredness in space.
Thus a human head, or ear, or finger is a discern-ible whole. It is also, both visually and function-ally, a center. We experience it as a center. And it is, in the end, its centeredness which is its most clear, defining mark.
In using the word center in this way, I am not referring at all to a point center like a center of gravity. I use the word center to identify an or-ganized zone of space that is to say, a distinct set of points in space, which, because of its orga-nization, because of its internal coherence, and because of its relation to its context, exhibits cen-teredness, forms a local zone of relative centered-ness with respect to the other parts of space.
When I use the word center, I am always referring to a physical set, a distinct physical system, which oc-cupies a certain volume in space, and has a special marked coherence. Even when the center is a social or cultural center, it is still ultimately spatial as well: it occurs in space, and always has a spatial locus.
There is a mathematical reason for thinking of the coherent entities in the world as centers, not as wholes. If I want to be accurate about a whole, it is natural for me to ask where that whole starts and stops. Suppose, for example, I am talking about a fishpond, and want to call it a whole. To be accurate about it in a mathematical theory, I want be able to draw a precise boundary around this whole, and say for each point in space whether it is part of this set of points or not. But this is very hard to do. Obviously the water is part of the fishpond. What about the concrete it is made of, or the clay under the ground? Is this part of the whole we call "the pond"? How deep does it go? Do I include the air which is just above the pond? Is that part of the pond? What about the pipes bringing in the water? These are uncomfortable questions, and they are not trivial. There is no natural way to draw a boundary around the pond which gets just the right things, and leaves out just the right things. In a very rigid way of thinking, this would make it seem that the pond does not really exist as a whole. Obviously this is the wrong con-clusion. The pond does exist. Our trouble is that we don't know how to define it exactly. But the trouble comes from referring to it as a “whole.”
That kind of terminology seems to make it nec-essary for me to draw an exact boundary, includ-ing just those things which are part of the pond, and leaving out just those which aren't. That is the mistake.¹4
**When I call the pond a center, the situation changes.** I can then recognize the fact that the pond does have existence as a local center of ac-tivity: a living system. It is a focused entity. But the fuzziness of its edges becomes less problem-atic. The reason is that the pond, as an entity, is focused towards its center. It creates a field of centeredness. But, obviously, this effect falls off. The peripheral things play their role in the pond.
But I do not need to make a definite commit-ment about the edge, and what is in and what is out, because that is not the point. What matters in the existence of the pond as a coherent entity is that the organization of the pond is caused by a field effect in which the various elements work together to produce this phenomenon of a center.
This is true physically in the actual physical sys-tem of the pond: water, edge, shallows, gradi-ents, lilies-all help in the formation of the pond as a center. And it is also true mentally in my perception of that pond. That is why it is more useful, and more accurate, to call the pond a cen-
ter rather than calling it a whole. The same is true for window, door, wall, or arch. None of them can be exactly bounded. They are all enti-ties which have a fuzzy edge, and whose exis-tence lies mainly in the fact that they exist as centers in the portion of the world which they inhabit.
There is yet another reason for preferring the term "center" to the term "whole." The enti-ties we are concerned with in a building include the most ordinary elements like staircase, bath-tub, door, kitchen sink, room, ceiling, door, doorway, window, curtain, and kitchen nook.
Ultimately, in dealing with design, we have to ask, What is the proper relationship among these elements? Here again there is a powerful reason for using the term "center." **From the point of view of relationships which appear in the design, it is more useful to call the kitchen sink a "center" than a "whole."** If I call it a whole, it then exists in my mind as an isolated object. But if I call it a center, it already tells me something extra; it cre-ates a sense, in my mind, of the way the sink is going to work in the kitchen. It makes me aware of the larger pattern of things, and the way this particular element - the kitchen sink fits into that pattern, plays its role in that pattern. It makes the sink feel more like a thing which radi-ates out, extends beyond its own boundaries, and takes its part in the kitchen as a whole.
On the other hand, if I call the sink a whole I have more of a feeling of boundedness. I lose the relationships which exist among things. It is as if I have drawn a skin around the sink, made it entire within itself, but cut it off more from what surrounds it. I am therefore less aware of the re-lationships it has, or will have, or should have, with the larger kitchen, and think of it more in itself, enclosed and shut off.
On one occasion, I was discussing the con-cept of centers, as it applied to some bedroom curtains, with my wife Pamela. She made the comment that the use of the word "centers," as I had explained it to her, was already changing her view of everything around her, even as we were talking: "When I look at the curtain in the room, and think of the curtain, the curtain rod, the window, the sky, the light on the ceiling, as centers, then I become so much more cognizant of the relatedness of all things it is as though my awareness increases, almost like eating the fruit in the garden of Eden; my eyes suddenly perceive everything in such a different way; I see the world in all its relatedness, and as it really is."
The same is true of all the entities which ap-pear in the world. When I think of them as wholes, or entities, I focus on their boundedness, their separation. When I think of them as cen-ters, I become more aware of their relatedness; I see them as focal points in a larger unbroken whole and I see the world as whole.

6 / WHOLENESS AS A SUBTLE STRUCTURE
In order to understand the way that centers are induced by the surrounding wholeness, let us re-once again to abstract examples. It is essential to note that the centers always become centers as a result of the configuration as a whole. For ex-ample, if I make a square like the one in the drawing on the next page, then this square ap-pears as a strong center. If I add two black trian-gles to the configuration, then even though the square is still there, the square is no longer very strong as a center, while other triangles have be-come relatively more strong and overshadow the original center, which has now "disappeared."
Thus the strength of any given center is not merely a function of the internal shape which creates that center in itself, but comes about as a result of the influence of many other factors which extend outward in the given region of space, always as a result of the configuration as a whole. This follows, anyway, from the list of mathematical features which are responsible for causing the strength. Symmetry, connectedness, convexity, homogeneity, boundaries, sharp change of features, and so forth are all functions of the configuration as a whole. The centers which make up any given wholeness do not exist inde-pendently, but appear as elements which are gen-erated by the configuration as a whole. It is the large-scale features of the configuration which produce the local centers and allow the local cen-ters to 'settle out.'
The wholeness in any given part of space is highly fluid, and easily affected by very small changes of geometry. Indeed wholeness changes continuously through time, and is dependent on subtle-sometimes even minute - changes in the configurations in it and around it. This hap-pens because the centers which occur are in-duced in a very subtle fashion, and therefore change quite markedly as even small changes are made in the fine structure of the configuration.
Consider again the sheet of paper and the dot. We have seen how one dot on the blank sheet of paper induces a widespread global struc-ture in the wholeness of the sheet of paper. One little dot, whose area is no more than 0.0001 of the sheet, thoroughly changes the wholeness of the sheet.
Now look (Case 1, next page) at what hap-pens when another dot is added. Entirely differ-ent centers are strengthened, and the structure suddenly becomes like a head. Or look (Case 2)
what happens when the second dot is added in a different position. Again quite new centers are created and, as a result, the structure suddenly becomes diagonal-like, with induced triangles and an upward-thrusting diagonal line like an arrow.
Like the first dot, each of these second dots is not more than 0.0001 of the sheet. Yet again this tiny change (tiny in actual area or volume) utterly alters the wholeness of what is there. So in each case the structure, which I call "the wholeness," of a thing is extremely susceptible to relatively minor changes in its details. The wholeness changes globally-and sometimes completely as a result of very small local phys-ical changes.
Thus it is clear that the wholeness is a struc-ture of great subtlety which is induced in the whole. It cannot easily be predicted from the parts, and it is useless to think of it as a relationship "among the parts." The wholeness is an autono-mous and global structure, which is induced by the details of the configuration. It is a real physi-cal and mathematical structure in space - but it is created indirectly, by symmetries and other re-lationships which are induced in the geometry.
To grasp the nature of this subtle structure fully, we must learn to avoid the danger of trying to see centers made up of parts. Present-day conven-tional wisdom (perhaps Cartesian and mecha-nistic in origin) tells us that everything is made of parts. In particular, people believe today that every whole is made of parts. The key aspect of this belief is the idea that the parts come "before" the whole: in short, the parts exist as elements of some kind, which are then brought into relation-ship with one another, or combined, and a center is "created" out of these parts and their combina-tions as a result.
I believe accurate understanding of whole-ness is quite different. **When we understand what wholeness is really like as a structure, we see that in most cases it is the wholeness which creates its parts. The center is not made from parts. Rather, it would be more true to say that most of the parts are created by the wholeness.**
**They settle out from the wholeness, and are cre-ated by all of it.** This is analogous to the way a whirlpool is created in a stream. The stream whirls, and the centers we see as the whirling (vortex, stream-lines, etc.) are created by the larger configuration of banks, rocks, and so forth. So, within this whirling, we observe a whirlpool which has formed. This is fundamen-tally different from the idea that wholes are made from elements or built from parts.
We may see the phenomenon as I believe it to be in the two-dot examples, where the visible things that look like parts are induced by the whole. Thus the visible diagonal in the second case of two dots is something we might call one of its "parts." But it is not a pre-existing element.
It is a part which is induced by the action of the whole. It "breaks out" naturally from the whole.
In no sense at all is it an element from which the center is built.
When we understand things in their whole-ness, this is the general rule. The sub-wholes- or centers - are induced within the wholeness, and come from the wholeness. And because of this, the parts are adapted and modified, in shape and size, by their position within the whole. The petals of a flower are not identical.
They are similar, but each one is slightly differ-ent according to its position and history in the whole. When parts repeat we never have identi-cal repetition. Instead we have repeated parts as centers which are changing and variable accord-ing to their position in the whole, as they repeat within the whole. In nature, this follows directly from the fact that parts are induced by the whole and created by the whole. The whole is not cre-ated out of them. The flower is not made from petals. The petals are made from their role and position in the flower. This is an entirely differ-ent vision of reality from the one we have become used to. In this new vision, it is always the whole, the wholeness as a structure, which comes first.
Everything else follows from this wholeness, and from the centers and sub-centers which are in-duced within it.

7 / A FURTHER EXAMPLE OF WHOLENESS AS IT IS CAPTURED BY THE SYSTEM OF CENTERS
I hope the wholeness, W, as I have defined it, ac-tually is beginning to capture that character we intuitively think of as "the whole."
Consider these two drawings of arches, A and B. The drawings are superficially somewhat similar, but the feeling they have is very differ-ent. We are aware, if we pay attention, that as wholes, they have a pronounced and different gestalt.
"A" has an arch form, a marked center in the middle at the point of the arch, and an overall coherence. "B" is a simpler, rectangular version of the same thing. But the difference is greater than these words suggest. The two really have extremely different character.
If we focus on the space as a whole, we see how different they are. The pointed one, A, has a focus on the point of the arch. It is united. One sees two wedge-shaped swaths of space to the left and to the right, emphasizing the way the sharp point almost cleaves the space above. The point is also very strongly marked. The second arch, B, is much more blunt. The main thing one is aware of is the stillness of the large square of empty space above the arch. The top of the arch, chisel shaped, is also still. One sees the two legs on either side as appendages. All this is what we mean by the "wholeness" of the two drawings.
DRAWING A. In the drawing labeled "Struc-of A," I have outlined the most salient cen-ters which appear within the space of the draw-ing and form the wholeness W. We can see that the centers I have marked form a kind of nested sequence. There is one at the vertex. There is an-other which is the triangle of space below the vertex that includes the vertex. There is another which is the whole arch. On the right and left of the arch, there are yet other upside-down trapezium-shaped wedges of space. Then there is a kind of rectangle of space next to the arch on each side of the arch. Together these visible centers form a kind of swooping movement which starts at the top of the drawing, goes down either side, and then comes up the middle, culminating in the point of the arch. They form a nested structure, which emphasizes the point of the arch and supports the entity that is the arch. The wholeness that we experience — the overall gestalt of the whole thing is precisely captured by the structure W.
DRAWING B. In the drawing labeled "Struc-ture of B," I have again outlined the strongest centers which appear to form its wholeness. In this case the centers form a somewhat less co-herent structure than in A. There is one center
in the rectangle at the top, across the top. There is another down each side. There is one center in the arch. These centers fit together in a fash-ion that roughly resembles the structure of the centers in drawing A, but it is a different struc-ture. For example in B the rectangle across the top is stronger and far more dominant than it is in A. The centers inside the arch are less nested and less dominant than in A. An overall struc-ture exists in B as it does in A, but appears to be less coherent, less bound together.
In both drawings, the system of centers de-scribes the wholeness we intuitively experience in the thing. And we have a hint of the way the wholeness Walso begins to describe, and explain, the difference in life between the two drawings.
A has more life than B, even if only slightly, and we find this fact reflected in the more coherent structure of its wholeness.

8 / THE FUNDAMENTAL ENTITIES OF WHICH THE WORLD IS MADE
Let us move on, now, to consider the appearance of the wholeness Win real world examples.
In the foregoing examples we saw how the wholeness of each drawing - the broad sweep of the thing-may be seen as the pattern of the main centers which exist in the space of the drawing. In the arch drawing, the centers are the plain and simple swaths of space and the special bits which stand out, like the apex of the arch or the point where the line of the arch meets the uprights. When we take these centers together, we see how they form themselves into still larger centers the sweep of the arch, the symmetrical system over the point of the arch, and so on-and that it is then the pattern of all these centers working together which forms the whole.
**What exactly, then, is wholeness?** That is the crux of the matter. My answer is that the whole-ness is not merely a way of focusing on the gestalt of the thing, but is instead a real structure, an ac-tual "thing" in itself. It is a structure which exists in the world that includes what we intuitively perceive as the gestalt, the overview, the broad nature of a thing. **It is the source of the coherence which exists in any part of the world.**
This wholeness gets its strength from the coherent spatial centers of which it is made. If there are roses around a front door of a cottage, that is what you remember; if there is a pair of ducks in the garden, and a fishpond, it is the ducks and fishpond you remember; if there is a great and wonderful room with mattresses where everybody sleeps - as in an Austrian mountain hut-then that is what you remember. The roses, the ducks, and the mattresses are all cen-ters, and it is these entities or centers which mark something as what it is, which make it memora-ble, remarkable.
The coherent centers define character, and create arrangement. The main coherent centers which exist in a place determine what it is like there, what kind of life it has. The centers are the most fundamental things we notice in what is happening. They affect us most. And this impor-tance of the coherent centers, as the entities which govern the character of a thing, appears on a more physical level too. If a building has room with an enormous gilded ceiling, it is that ceiling we remember. If the room has immense windows with hundreds of panes looking toward the soft east light, it is those windows we re-member. The Stefansdom in Vienna has a huge eagle on the roof. It is the roof we remember, and the huge eagle on it. If one building has columns which are blank concrete shafts, and another has capitals, with a wonderful shape, painted and round, it is these capitals we remember. If a building has a skating rink outside, like Rocke-feller Plaza in New York, it is the skating and the skaters we remember.
These are the explicit, obvious centers. And they are not only spatial. Other centers, some hidden, some hardly visible in the space, but latent, or biological, or social, also control the behavior of the world. The arrangement, shape, and pattern of buildings, rooms, streets, and fur-niture come from the centers again. That which we commonly call "arrangement" -as in the simple example of the two arches in drawings A and B - is also created by centers. Even shape is dominated by the centers and sub-centers which form it. A cross is created by one center at the crossing point, four centers at the extremities, with their larger centers formed by their overlap-ping relationships to one another. A circle is created by a continuous system of identical cen-ters forming short arcs around the perimeter, neighboring ones overlapping each other and coming back to join themselves, with larger cen-ters in the void of the circle to form the core.
The wholeness of any portion of the world is this system of larger and smaller centers, in their connection and overlap. The wholeness of a window includes the coherent space which binds the window together-its sill, glass, the sloping reveals, its mullions, the landscape outside, the light coming in, the soft light on the wall next to the window, the chair drawn up toward the window's light- and the forma-tion of larger centers which makes them one: the space of the window seat which binds the window reveals, seat, sill, and window plane;
the view which combines chair, outdoor land-scape, and the glazing bars; the light falling on the window reveal and on the floor. Here, as before, the wholeness is defined by the major centers-entities and the way these centers are arranged to form still larger centers. Some centers are explicit. Like the dot, which we see easily; others, like the space around the dot, we see with more difficulty, because it is more subtle. In the photograph on this pages, the cottage is given its character partly by the explicit and obvious centers the roses, the arched trellis on which the roses climb, the surface of the roof, the individual tiles which form that surface. And, partly, it is given its character by the less visible centers, formed and induced within the wholeness - the "hole" of the archway beneath the trellis, the space in front of the cottage wall, the line in space which connects the archway to the small win-dow in the cottage wall. All the centers together, explicit ones and hidden ones together, form the wholeness in this cottage, as they do in any given part of the world at any moment.

9 / THE SUBTLETY OF CENTERS WHICH EXIST IN THE WORLD
Let us now consider a further example of the subtle wholeness as it appears in the real world. Look at the scene in the photograph on the right.
We see a tree, a road, and a bicycle parked at the edge of the road under the tree. In our normal way of looking at this scene, we see various frag-ments which seem to be "parts" of the whole: the tree, the road, the bike, the cyclist.
Learning to see the wholeness as it is in a case like this, not muddled or contaminated by words and concepts, is extremely difficult, but it is possible to learn, consciously, to pay attention to this wholeness. (The difficulty is discussed at some length in appendix 3, where I also give one example of a technique for helping a person see
wholeness as it is.15)
When we see wholeness as it is, we recog-nize that these seeming parts - the road, the tree, the bike, these particular centers—are merely arbitrary fragments which our minds have been directed to, because we happen to have words for them. If we open our eyes wide, and look at the scene without cognitive preju-dice, we see something quite different: a great swath of space, wider than the road, which ex-tends to the distance and includes the flat land on either side of the road as one of the major centers in the scene (center #1 in the diagram).
We see a space under the tree, between the road and the tree, as another obvious "place" or cen-ter within the scene. We see the spot where the person is leaning, on the right side of the tree, as a major point of concentration. Also, if we look carefully, we see a flat, ring-shaped swath of space under the tree, almost like a flat cylin-drical donut, caused by the fact that the tree's foliage has been trimmed to just above head height all around (center #2 in the diagram). And we see the top of the tree, the wooly, bee-hive shape of the tree itself-but it is not the tree which draws our attention as an entity—it is the top of the tree without the trunk-the mass of foliage (center #3 in the diagram). Thus the centers we see, when we look for wholeness, are not the centers which are captured by words, like "road," "bike," and "tree," but a different set of centers, which have no special words attached to them, and which are in-duced structurally by the overall configuration of this scene.
The wholeness of this scene is created by these centers, all of them together. They are really there, actually existing centers in the space. It is not our imagination, and not some conceptual occurrence. Their existence and their strength becomes visible when we make our minds blank and look without focusing at all parts of the page at once. In this unfocused or defocused state, we see the big swath of space over grass and road, we see the cotton-wool top of the tree, we see the trunk and the ring of space around it as the strongest things.
The things which have easy names - the tree, the bike, the road (though they too have their relative degree of wholeness and centeredness) are less strong within the overall configuration.
They are centers, too, but they are lesser centers within this configuration, and play a less im-portant role within the structure as a whole.
For example, why does the rider of the bike put his bike under this tree? What invites him to stop, what invites the bike to be there at all, is the donut of space under the tree, not the
tree itself. Thus the wholeness and its real sys-tem of centers, hidden and not-hidden, are the structures which have impact on the world. We shall not understand how the world works un-less we pay attention to the structure of whole-ness as it is.
Consider, from this enlarged perspective, a rather more complex case: my family's garden in West Sussex, England. What is most noticeable about the garden is the way it has life. The ducks
come up from the pond, following one another, to the gate. The plum tree is on the sheep meadow.
The tennis court, at one corner of the garden, is shielded by rows of apple trees, heavily laden with fruit. In the main flower border the roses bloom; the driveway comes up to the house between net-tles and hawthorn hedges. The cats bring the rab-bits they catch, and leave the innards of the rabbits on the back terrace. The meadow by the stream floods in the winter, and the following spring the meadow is thick with flowers.
What makes this a living structure is its wholeness. And what exactly is its wholeness? It is the white-washed brick house, standing four-square and simple, unadorned in the field. It is the huge kitchen, the largest room, lit on two sides by garden windows, with a big warm stove warming the kitchen constantly as it heats the hot water;
the kitchen table, long, with eight rush chairs around it; the hallway, generous, uncluttered, a room in itself that you enter as you come into the house. The centers which make this farmhouse what it is, and the life which occurs in the farm-house, are inseparable. It is the centers which cre-ate its behavior, its nature, its substance.
Although one may be misled into thinking about design, the features which design seems to deal with are minor, have less importance.
The centers the coherent entities which form the whole - are life-affirming, massive in their effect, and tremendously concrete, so that minor changes in design could not sway them, or upset them, or change them.
For example: the duck pond, surrounded by the pasture on one side, by the chicken run, with the small seat on one side and the island where the ducks go to escape the fox at night. All these are the effective centers, which make the life of the ducks at the farm.
For example: the stone terrace outside the kitchen, leading out onto the lawn, with the cat door in it. It is the place where we sit, go out to cut flowers in the rose beds just beyond. The flagstones which form this center have an enor-mous role in the active life of the house.
In the wholeness of this garden, we find that, once again, it is the real centers the most coherent centers as they actually are, not those which happen to have convenient names - which dominate the feeling and behavior of the place.
Consider the wholeness of the building and the lane together. Suppose there is a garden in front. Perhaps there is a porch, a stone platform at the door, flowers in the garden, a hedge along the lane, and at the back of the garden the wall of the house itself, windows in that wall, a roofline - and so on.
What does it mean to see all this from the point of view of wholeness? I notice the sunny part of the garden itself as a space. The place where the roses are climbing near the kitchen catches my eye. The path to the front door, and the steps from the back porch, and the door itself, the door of the house, all work as a unit, as a continuous center about 40 feet long. The sun-shine and the roof edge, with the rafters re-peating under the eave, together form a pattern of light and shadow which leads my eye, and forms a boundary of the house against the sky.
Perhaps there is a reflection from one of the windows. The window and its curtains form a frame for what I see behind in the darkness of the room.
All this is much more like a pulsating unity than the "conceptual" or intellectual image of the house. In our conceptual picture of the house, we have things called street, garden, roof, front door, and so on. But the centers or entities which hit my eye when I take it all in as a whole are slightly different. I see the sunny part of the\ garden where the sun is falling on the lawn as a center - not the entire "garden." I see the swath of space which unites front steps, front path, and front stoop, not the "front door." I see the roofline and the light and shadow of the eave, not the "roof" as such. Also there is a thing which I might call "garden-plus-street" — a cen-ter where the flowerbed meets the street. This is entirely different from the conceptual and verbal entity "street" or the conceptual and verbal entity "house." It straddles conceptual boundaries.
**The difference is deeply functional, not just a matter of visual perception. The centers we see when we look at the thing in its wholeness are the ones which are responsible for its real behav-ior. For example, it is the sunny part of the garden which makes a difference to the way the garden really works, not the abstract or conceptual entity marked "garden" that is bounded by the house and the fence.** It is the swath of space going from the front gate, over gravel, past the roses to the front door which actually controls the way we feel as we approach the house and enter it - not the conceptual entity "front door." It is the bit of land where garden lawn meets fence and field where the sheep graze, backed up by the willow over the lawn, where we often pull our chairs in the shade, that allows us to sit there drinking our tea, watching the world go by-and this affects the life and feeling of the house in its relation to the world much more substantially than any characteristic of the abstract entity we call the "garden."
Thus the centers we notice when we see the situation in its wholeness are not only more dominant to the eye. They control the real behavior of the thing, the life which develops there, the real human events which happen, and the feelings people have about living there. The house-garden com-plex seen in its wholeness is truer perceptually and more accurate functionally than any analytic vision of the house or lot or garden taken by themselves.
It is apparent, if we think carefully, that we are not used to seeing or looking at this kind of structure in the world around us. If we consider a garden and a house from this point of view, the deep centers hidden in the house and the garden are unexpected, just as they are in the sheet of paper with a dot. They are subtle, perhaps invis-ible to a casual observer. Yet it is these centers and their structure which give the thing its life.

10 / WHOLENESS AS A FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE
Everything that follows in this book is a view of physical reality dominated by the existence of wholeness as I have defined it.
I propose a view of physical reality which is dominated by the existence of this one particular structure, W, the wholeness. **In any given region of space, some subregions have higher intensity as cen-ters, others have less. Many subregions have weak intensity or none at all. The overall configuration of the nested centers, together with their relative inten-sities, comprise a single structure. I define this struc-ture as "the" wholeness of that region.** This structure exists everywhere in the world. It exists in nature; it exists in buildings; it exists in works of art. It is a fundamental struc-ture in space which not only encompasses the wholeness or gestalt of the thing; it also encom-passes the obvious parts, or elements, from which this thing is made.
I am firmly convinced that the nature and behavior of buildings and other artifacts can only be understood within the context of this structure. In particular, objective recognition of the fact that some buildings have more life than others, and are objectively more beautiful and satisfying, can only-I think-be achieved in the context of this structure. 
I believe, too, that life, in an ordinary bio-logical sense, is itself also created from this wholeness: and that efforts to explain it in more mechanical fashion will go on failing, as they have in recent decades.
A crucial feature of the wholeness is that it is neutral: it simply exists. Determination of its details may be made by neutral methods, yet at the same time — as we shall see in later chap-ters — the relative harmony or "life" of a given building may be understood directly from the in-ternal cohesion of the structure. Thus, the rela-tive life or beauty or goodness of a given part of the world may be understood, I shall argue, without reference to opinion, prejudice or phi-losophy, merely as a consequence of the wholeness which exists.

11 / THE GLOBAL CHARACTER OF WHOLENESS
I have not yet emphasized the enormous power of the wholeness, W. This structure catches the overall character in a way which is almost myste-rious, but goes to the heart of many things not easily explained. This happens because it is an overall field-like structure, a global, overall effect.
It is distinct, completely distinct, from the ele-ments or "parts" which appear in that wholeness; it is unusual in our experience, yet catches what we have often thought of as the artistic intuition about the whole.
I know of no example which makes this more clear than a famous one which appears in an essay on portraiture by Matisse. 19 He talks about the fact that the character of a human face is something which is deep in the person, deep in the face, and may not be captured by the local features in the normal sense at all. To make his point, he shows four drawings he made of his own face. These drawings, reproduced below, are remarkable. The features, in the normal sense, are different in each drawing. In one he has a weak chin, in another a very strong chin. In one he has a huge roman nose, in another a small pudgy nose. In one the eyes are far apart, in an-other they are close together. And yet, in each of the four faces, we see the unmistakable face and character of Henri Matisse. As Matisse says, the character is something deeper than features: it is an inner thing which exists over and above the features, and is not even dependent on these features.
What in the world is going on? What is it that Matisse is seeing? How is it that we see Matisse's face, in each case, even though the fea-tures are so entirely different? What is this elu-sive "character" in a person's face which Matisse can see so well, and which we fail to see as clearly?
The answer is, this "character" is the whole-ness. It is the overall vector, the overall qualita-tive structure, the overall field effect of the face.
It is a global pattern-like aspect of the face which is the same in all four pictures. How should I de-scribe this wholeness? It is the bald head with the eyes and with the eyes spreading concentrating downward, coming to a point somewhere around the mouth. Also the lower part, mustache, jaw, etc., somehow spreads outward again. We do not have an easy language for describing this kind of overall structure. But it is indeed this overall structure of the centers that is responsible for the wholeness. And, as far as this is concerned, it is the same in all four drawings. And it is the same, too, of course, in the photo of Matisse — be-cause that is actually what was in his face. The wholeness of this face is that thing which is com-mon to all four drawings, and includes none of that which is different in the four drawings.
Thus the drawings accurately reflect the whole-ness of Matisse's actual face, even though this wholeness is produced in conjunction with local features which vary enormously.
This definition makes it clear how much the wholeness is a global thing- easy to feel, per-haps, but hard to define. You cannot get por-trait of a person right unless you can see this un-derlying wholeness, this underlying inner character. Drawing the features correctly does not necessarily achieve a resemblance. How many artists, in their first attempts at portrai-ture, have found this out, in frustration? If you want to draw a person, you have to draw the wholeness. Nothing else will get the likeness. 
In portraiture, as in architecture, it is the wholeness which is the real thing that lies be-neath the surface, and determines everything.

12 / WHOLENESS AS A FUNDAMENTAL PART OF PHYSICS

13 / WHOLENESS AS THE UNDERLYING SUBSTRATE OF ALL LIFE IN SPACE

14 / LIFE COMES DIRECTLY FROM THE WOLENESS
The essence of the wholeness, as I have defined it, is neutral: it simply exists.
At each place in the world - with its natu-ral habitat, ecology, buildings, materials, actions, and events there is, at any instant, some given wholeness; that is, some definite, well-defined system of centers that creates the organization of that part of the world. And the wholeness always exists in some form, whether that place is good or bad, lifeless or alive.
But we shall see next that the degree of life which exists at that place and time also comes from the wholeness, and only from the whole-ness. The neutral wholeness spawns characteris-tics which are far from neutral characteristics which indeed go to the very origin of right and wrong. As we shall see in the next chapter, the life which occurs is specifically dependent on the system of centers, and the degree of life, the in-tensity of life, arises from the wholeness.
Whether it is an apple-orchard, a dining-room, a harem, a dung heap in the garden, a painting, the wall of a building with its windows, the glaze of an earthenware pot, or the fervent kiss of a boy-in every case, the life which that thing has arises from its wholeness.
So this neutral wholeness, which lies un-der the surface of every place, at every time, in buildings, meadows, streets - is the natural ori-gin of life. Life comes from it. Life comes from the particular details of the ways the centers in the wholeness cohere to form a unity, the ways they interact, and interlock, and influence each other. The academic and difficult task of grasp-ing the nature of this wholeness will pay us back, by giving us the origin of life.