1 / VITAL POINTS	8
2 / THE HOTEL PALUMBO	8
3 / HOW LIVING STRUCTURE IS CREATED FROM CENTERS IN THE WHOLENESS
It is hard to deny the life of the Palumbo Hotel
terrace. The life of the place is tangible and im-
mediate. But this wonderful life does not come
about merely because of a vague beauty in the
place. It comes about in a very
definite way be-
cause of the centers in the wholeness and their
relation to one another. In particular, it comes
about because the different centers help each other.
It is this mutual helping among the centers
which causes the life and is the crux of the whole
thing. Here is one example of this "helping" be-
tween centers: The terrace is made of structural
bays
each
each made by four columns
roughly square, about 13 feet by 13 feet. Each of
these bays is itself a center. At the corners of the
bays there are columns. The columns are centers,
too. And on each column, on each of its corners,
there is a chamfer. The chamfer is once again a
center in its own right.
Each of the four-column bays is helped to be
alive by these tiny chamfers on the columns at
-
-
the corners of the bay. What I mean by this is
that each bay becomes more of a center, and is
more alive, because of the chamfer. Suppose, for
example, that the columns had been made
square, without the little octagonal chamfer on
the corners. Then, as you can see on the facing
page, each column would slightly eat into the
space of the bay, thus disturbing the wholeness of
the bay. Instead, the four chamfers help, geomet-
rically, to increase the unity and wholeness of the
space in the bay. These chamfers, which are only
two or three inches across, strengthen and inten-
sify the structural bay which is created by the
columns, and is some 13 feet across. At the same
time, the chamfer also helps and intensifies the
column itself. Thus we have the following help-
ing relations between the space, the column, and
the chamfer:
chamfers - column
4
4 columns - space of bay
16 chamfers - space of bayilor to
tuon guard
ung
Each bay has a system of twenty-one cen-
ters, in all, each getting life from the presence
and cooperation of the others.
It must be emphasized that this helping re-
lation between centers does not occur automati-
cally. The columns could just as easily have been
made in another way which would not have this
beneficial effect on the space. The corner of the
column could have been given a shape which
does not help to intensify the column. Creating a
smaller center (in this case the chamfer) which
successfully intensifies the column and also in-
tensifies the bay (space made by four columns) is
quite a trick.
Let us look at another case. In the lower
left-hand photograph, the children are playing
in the small walled garden at the end of the ter-
race. The walled garden continues the space of
the terrace, but encloses and "ends" it. The
beauty of this closing is not only geometrical. As
you can see, the children run the length of the
terrace, then turn around in the end part, and
come flying back. An old person strolling along
would do a slower version of the same. The gar-
den at the end, by forming a turning point, helps
the terrace as a whole, makes it more of a living
center than it would be without it. Again the re-
sult is not automatic. If the garden at the end 
were smaller, or larger, or differently walled, this
effect would not occur.
Another example. There is an electric light
mounted on the column, a very ordinary light
that was chosen and placed so that it helps the
capital. The capital becomes a little more intense
because the lamp is just there. Again, this is not
automatic. If the light were lower down, or
asymmetrically mounted, or a more obtrusive
shape, this would not happen.
In each case, the helping relation between
two centers, A and B, may be seen in the fact that
the one center increases the life of the other (the
life of A helps increase the life of B). For exam-
ple, when I look at the flower box on the low
wall, the life of the low wall is increased by the
existence of the flower box. If I take the flower
box away mentally (with my hand, by covering
part of the photograph) I see the life of the low
wall drop down, diminish.
Although, in one sense, the helping relation
between centers is obvious, you may be puzzled
as to how one might determine, operationally,
when one center is helping another one.
Wouldn't it be possible to say that any two cen-ters near each other are helping each other? How do we know when it is really happening? This quite reasonable question has a practical answer.
Suppose we have two centers A and B, and we want to know if B is helping A or not. We simply look at A with B, and without B, and go back and forth between the two, using the criterion of life to decide which of the two, A with B or A with-out B, has more life. If, of the two, A with B has more life, then B is helping A.²
In this terrace at the Hotel Palumbo there are dozens - hundreds really of these help-ing relations between the centers. Here are some
other examples:
The capital of the columns is shaped to make the columns more alive.
The nine-fold division of the trellis helps the bay become calmer and more alive.
The tables set in the bays help the bays come to life.
The bays also intensify the tables.
The low wall between the columns intensifies the column bay between the water and the garden.
The low wall helps the view.
The view of the bay and the blue sky helps the individual bays.
The grapes help the view.
The grapes help the tables.
The round tables help the bays.
The chairs help the round tables.
The lights on the columns help the columns and the bays.
The flowers in the garden help the bays.
The low wall helps the flowers.
The grass helps the terrace.
The vines help the grass.
Some of the helping relations between cen-ters are very large in scale. For example, one of the most important centers in the terrace is the view through the columns. Certainly at the Pa-lumbo it is one of the most marvelous things: a vast entity extending out from the terrace towards the distant hazy blue of the sea. We may imagine it as a cloud of space stretching from the terrace to the sea and over the sea. In a person's experience of that place, there is no doubt this center appears as a major entity, and no doubt that the existence of this large center brings life to the smaller center of the terrace itself.
What makes us so definite about recogniz-ing the merging of the blue of the sea and the sky as a center in the place? It is something we are transfixed by, we stare at it, we are drunk in it, and the far-off blue haze helps the green vines of the terrace come to life. And the bays of the terrace themselves, as individual centers, gain greater life from this larger center which is stretched between these bays and the world be-yond towards the Gulf of Salerno.
The system of centers, the ways these cen-ters help each other, and the continuity of the thing with the whole world - these together form the structure which establishes the life of the thing.

4 / RECURSIVE DEFINITION OF A CENTER	8
5 / THE DIAGRAM OF LIVING STRUCTURE: EACH CENTER AS A FIELD	8
6 / EACH CENTER HAS ITS LIFE	8
7 / EACH CENTER GETS ITS LIFE FROM OTHER CENTERS	8
8 / HOW LIFE OCCURS WITHIN A BUILDING	8
9 / HOW RECURSION, AS A PROCESS, CREATES THE LIFE OF A CENTER STEP BY STEP	8
10 / PROFOUND LIFE WHICH CAN ARISE IN THE DEEPEST CASES	8
11 / OBJECTIVE COMPARISON OF DEGREES OF LIFE	8
12 / BREADTH OF THE CONCEPT OF LIVING STRUCTURE	8
13 / EXCITEMENT	8
APPENDIX : IMPORTANCE OF THE ACCURACY OF CENTERS IN A LIVING STRUCTURE
