1 / INTRODUCTION: WHAT DOES IT MEAN FOR SOMETHING TO BE PERSONAL?	10
2 / OUR EVERYDAY PERSONAL FEELING AND THE FIELD OF CENTERS	10
3 / WHOLENESS AND FEELING
Living structure is, by its very nature, personal
and feeling-endowed. The field of centers exists
in a thing to that degree to which the thing has per-
sonal feeling. To show that it is indeed a matter of
degree, visible in shadings, I start with a simple
comparison. I take two blank sheets of paper,
and put them a few inches apart, side by side. I
leave the left one blank. On the right one, I draw
a small diamond-shaped dot in the middle of
the page.
Most people will agree that there is more
feeling in the right-hand paper. It is more per-
sonal. It is also true that the field of centers is
more strongly present on the second sheet than
on the first.
You may say, "Why did you choose to put a
diamond in the middle of the paper?" Suppose I
had put a little irregular curved line somewhere
on the page. Would this still do it? Wouldn't al-
most anything put on the piece of paper have
more feeling than a blank sheet? After all, a
blank sheet of paper is so impersonal that the
comparison doesn't prove much.
So let us also take a third piece of paper, and
draw an irregular squiggle on it, and let us now
put this piece of paper to the left of the blank
one, thus, as in the second row of drawings (next
page). In this case, the paper on the left, with the
squiggle, has less feeling and is less personal than
the one with the diamond. It has even less feel-
ing than the sheet which is blank.
Let me explain this in terms of the field of
centers. If I look at the right-hand sheet of the
three, the world seems to tie itself together, it cen-
ters in on the diamond, I feel a focus or a concen-
trated knot in the fabric of things. This simple
field of centers is coherent. In the middle sheet, I
do not feel this so intensely, but still the page fits,
in a reasonably calm way, into the world: there is
still a coherent field of centers, so that there is still
connectedness, though not as much as in the
right-hand sheet. In the one on the left, there is
sense of disturbance: the squiggle interacts with
the page in such a way that even the page itself no
longer fits nicely into the world around it. The
field of centers is incoherent, and the overall con-
nectedness has been disturbed.
In the sense I am describing, the sheet with
the diamond-shaped dot in the middle creates the
most wholeness in the world. The one with the
squiggle creates the least. In addition, the one
with the diamond has the most personal feeling,
and the one with the squiggle has the least.
Why do I say that the one with the diamond
has the most personal feeling in it? I can explain
that by using the following experiment: suppose,
as in chapter 9, I ask you to tell me which of the
three you would pick as a picture of your whole-
some self, or your own soul. I think you will pick
the right-hand one first, the middle one second,
and the left-hand one third. You may agree with
this, but still wonder why I call the diamond per-
sonal. It perhaps does not seem personal in the
ordinary sense.
-
To convince you that it is indeed more per-
sonal than the others, let me propose another
thought experiment. Suppose you are with a per-
son you love very much. Imagine you are comfort-
able, happy, loving, and childish with this per-
son also vulnerable, and not afraid of being
vulnerable. Perhaps you may even feel like a little
five-year-old in the degree of your trust and vul-
nerability. And suppose you have just made the
three pieces of paper we have been looking at.
Imagine now that you want simply to give one
of these pieces of paper to this person as a funny,
special present, as an expression of your feeling —
a tiny gift, which will flutter away in the wind five
minutes later, but which you want to give in such
away as to share your inner secret with this person.
Which of the three will you give? Most likely, you
will give the one on the right. The one with the
diamond feels valuable, feels worth giving, feels
the most intimate of the three.
-
I do not insist that this is true. But I ask you
to make a note of the fact that it might be true
that what is personal can be directly and clearly
identified in the realm of feeling — and that it
happens to correspond to the presence of the field
of centers.
Let us go on to a more complicated case.
Here are three drawings of women by famous
20th-century artists: Pablo Picasso, Henry
Moore, and Henri Matisse. The same distinc-
tions of degree in the "personal" that are illus-
trated in the three tiny sheets of paper also
occur in these more complex drawings. After
careful examination, comparison with the fifteen
properties, and so on, I believe we shall conclude
that the Matisse has the strongest field of centers.


4 / SIMPLE HAPPINESS	10
5 /  FEELING AS THE INWARD ASPECT OF LIFE
