1 / INTRODUCTION
The existence of the wholeness as an objective, neutrally existing structure, and the possibility of seeing life in buildings as something which emerges naturally from this wholeness as living structure gives us a unifying picture of reality.
The concept of living structure holds the prom-ise of understanding architecture clearly and co-herently. It gives us a single way of talking about function in buildings, ecology, and the beauty of artifacts in a single language -one which shows us the profound meaning and consequence of all these related facets of the world, and one which, above all, gives us an ethical view of things, be-cause the life (really goodness) of any portion of the world is, in this view, then an objective mat-ter which arises from this structure.
In the next chapters, I shall show that this view has a feature which I have not emphasized so far: it is deeply, and necessarily connected to the human self.
For three hundred years our mechanistic world view has disconnected us from our selves.
We have a picture of the universe that is power-ful and apparently accurate, but no clear sense how we, our own selves, enter into this picture.
This is the famous bifurcation of nature dis-cussed by Whitehead. We have a disconnected vision of reality, which seems secure, which seems strong and objective - but which leaves me out. My experience of self, my own actual person, my existence as I experience it every day is not part of the "objective" world-picture. So, my daily encounter with the world, I have to make do with a world-picture that fails to con-nect me to the world. I flail around in it and struggle.
We shall see, in the following chapters, that this situation is changed in the world-picture which I propose. In this new world-picture, based on wholeness and the structure of centers, the connection between the outer or objective world and my experience of the self is profound and immediate. It makes sense. It is pervasive. It is direct.
To approach the new relation between self and world-picture, let us turn again to the question of how we decide which things have more life, which have less. What I have described in chapters 1 to 7 tells us that life can be seen as phenomenon which depends entirely on the ex-istence of centers in the world. Wholeness is made of centers. Centers appear in space. When the wholeness becomes profound, we experience it as life, in buildings, in other artifacts, in na-ture, even in actions. The life is able to be more profound, or less profound, because the centers themselves have different degrees of life and the life of any one center depends on the life of other centers. The life of a building thus comes about as a recursive phenomenon in which different centers prop each other up and intensify their life cooperatively. It is responsible for the func- tional life in a building (the way it works) and for the geometric life (its beauty). They are one and the same thing.
But at the bottom of all this, there is still a puzzling question, the question of the life of the centers themselves. The actual life itself which any given center possesses, its degree of life, is still not entirely clear as a concept. We cannot easily avoid the idea that space itself has the power to come to life-a center is an emerging spot life in the material substance of space itself. This is disturbing, or at least surprising, because it is inconsistent with most modern interpretations of physics. But even if we want to accept it, we still don't really know what it means. What is it? What is this thing which happens as space comes to life? What is the life of a center, which then multiplies and blossoms to form the life of build-ings, ornaments... and perhaps even the life of living things?
Everything I have been talking about de-pends on the operational validity of this idea. It is this idea of life in space which forms the un-derpinning for the objectivity of wholeness, and for the basic idea that architecture can be under-stood in an objective way. All of it depends on the level of belief, understanding, and certainty we have about this life which can occur in things.
We need to know how to measure it, how to estimate the degree of life inherent in a given center, and above all to find out what it is. If the wholeness is as important as it appears to be, it is of course essential-indeed necessary that we can reach an objective understanding of it, that we learn to recognize it as something which is objectively present in any given part of the world we pay attention to. Although I have made arguments which depend on the objectivity of its existence, I have not yet presented the empirical methods which are needed to establish it as objec-tive-which tell us how, in disputed cases, we can reach agreement.
As it turns out, the relation of the outer (and objective) wholeness to the inner (and subjective) self, and the empirical methods needed to estab-lish degree of life in different places, are deeply connected. They turn out, indeed, to be two fac-ets of one and the same idea. It hinges on the question: what kind of judgment are we making when we see that one thing has a greater degree of life than another?
2/ LIKING SOMETHING FROM THE HEART
Let us start with the idea of liking. What we do as artists, in the realm of building, really de-pends on what we like. What society builds de-pends on ideas that are shared about what people like. But contemporary ideas of what is likable are extremely confused. It is a current dogma that you may like what you wish, and that it is an essential part of democratic freedom to like whatever you decide to like. This occurs at a time when the mass media have taken over our ideas of what is likable to an extent unknown in hu-man history. **Thus if one were pessimistic, one might even say that there is very little authentic liking in our time. What people like can often not be trusted, because it does not come from the heart.**
On the other hand, real liking, which does come from the heart, is profoundly linked to the idea of life in things. **Liking something from the heart means that it makes us more whole in our-selves. It has a healing effect on us. It makes us more human. It even increases the life in us**. Fur-ther, I believe that this liking from the heart is connected to perception of real structures in the world, that it goes to the very root of the way things are, and that it is the only way in which we can see structures as they really are.
As we begin to appreciate this liking from the heart, we shall find out a number of im-portant things about it.¹
1. The things we like (from the heart) make us feel wholesome when we are near them.
2. We also feel wholesome when we are making these things. As we make them, and after making them, we feel whole in ourselves, healed, and right with the world.
3. The more accurate we are about what we re-ally like, in this sense of liking from the heart, the more we find out that we agree with other people about which these things are.
4. What we like from the heart coincides with the objective structure of wholeness or life in a thing. As we get to know the "it" which we like from the heart, we begin to see that this is the deepest thing there is. It applies to all judgments-not just about buildings and works of art, but also about actions, people, everything.
5. There is an empirical way in which we can help ourselves to find out what we really like from


3 / AN EMPIRICAL TEST FOR COMPARING THE DEGREE OF LIFE OF DEIIFERENT CENTERS

4 / THE MIRROR OF THE SELF

5 / THE SURPRISING QUALITY OF SELF

6 / WHOLENESS AND REAL LIKING

7 / LEARNING TO IDENTIFY THE THINGS WE REALLY LIKE

I may have given the impression that the mirror-of-the-self test is a mechanical test which always produces the right answers and which always produces agreement. The real situation is not so neat and tidy. It can take years and years to learn to perform this test correctly. Also, in the process of learning it, one is forced to learn more and more about one's own self. Thus even one's un-derstanding of one's own self is changed by the task of learning to perform this test. Since even the process of applying this test depends on an evolution of development in the observer, the test is far from mechanical and is not always accurate.
In order to make this clear, I should like to describe in more detail some of the real problems which occur when you do this experiment. First of all, suppose we look at a variety of objects and try to decide which ones are more like the self. In some cases, this is easy, and the experiment gets clear results, as in the salt-shaker and ketchup-bottle experiment. In other cases, it is really hard to tell. You look at the two objects, and you try to
decide which one you want to choose as a picture
of your self, and it is very hard; you look and look
... and finally you pick one. But when you com-
pare notes with other people, you find out that
they have chosen differently.
The experiment seems to have failed. But
then, after finding out what other people say, or
think, or comment on, you look back at the two
things, think about them, look some more, and
gradually you change your mind. You realize that
you chose the one you did because of some extra-
neous reason that it seemed slicker; that it had
a softness which reminded you of your old family
home; that it made you think of X, or Y or Z. But
after looking and looking and looking, it gradu-
ally becomes clearer that the one you chose is the
more trivial of the two, that it is not a very good
picture of your self after all, and that the other one
which you did not choose at first has more lasting
power. So, really, in the long run, it is this other
one which is a better picture of your self.
A hardened empiricist who reads this com-
ment may say, "Well, there is nothing here, this
is not an experiment at all, just a lot of talk being
made to sound like an experiment." But this is
precisely the problem. The wholeness is real, and
you do gradually approach convergence as you
find out whether a particular thing is whole or
not, or how much wholeness it has in relation
to another thing-but it is very hard to find out.
That is the experimental and empirical reality.
Sometimes, it can take five or ten years to find out
which one really is a better picture of your self.
I myself have experienced this dramatically,
many times, in the case of ancient Turkish car-
pets. I used to collect carpets and did, for years,
try to find those in which this quality appears.
most deeply. I found that sometimes I had to
look at a particular carpet for hours, weeks, and
even years before I knew how good it really was.
But all the time, what I found out was something
real. This is not a process in which our subjective
preferences are merely shifting (though that can
happen too). It is a process in which you gradually
find out which one of a group of things is the
most alive. The mirror-of-the-self experiment helps to hasten this process by allowing you to fo-cus, clearly, on the issue at hand-and by helping to drive other irrelevant criteria out of your mind.
Thus the experiment is real and legitimate, but it is taking place within an immensely com-plex process in which you are both finding out about the relative degree of life in different things in the world and, at the same time, also finding out about your own wholeness and your own self.
As far as I know, this process of finding out about wholeness and living structure cannot be simplified. It is deep and difficult. The confu-sion, the gradual separation of preferences from living structure, the difficulty of comparing notes and sorting out cultural bias and opinions foisted on us by others-getting through this maze does pay off in the end. There is a real quality which gradually emerges as the true thing which can be identified and relied upon.
What is happening then as we perform this test? Why do I consider this test a reliable way of estimating the relative degree of living structure in a thing? Our own minds are confused by opin-ions, images, and thoughts. Because of these, we often fail to see accurately the relative life or de-gree of wholeness in different things. Neverthe-less, their degree of life may be gauged by the de-gree to which the thing resembles our own self.
However, even in making this judgment, we can again be confused, because our idea of our own self is also confused by images, thoughts, and opinions. Gradually, as we mature, we learn to recognize our own mind or self as merely a part of some greater thing or self. I can refer to this larger self as the original mind. I am then able to judge the degree of wholeness or the degree of life in a building according to the degree to which it is a picture of this original mind. Since the original mind is part of me (or I am part of it), I have it available to me, in principle, whenever I want to make this test. But I shall succeed in making my judgment only to the degree to which I have got-ten rid of mistaken notions of what my own mind is, or my own self.
This is an arduous task.

나는 자기 거울 테스트가 항상 올바른 답을 산출하고 항상 일치를 산출하는 기계적 테스트라는 인상을 주었을 것입니다. 실제 상황은 그렇게 단정하고 깔끔하지 않습니다. 이 테스트를 올바르게 수행하는 방법을 배우려면 몇 년과 몇 년이 걸릴 수 있습니다. 또한 그것을 배우는 과정에서 점점 더 자신에 대해 배우게 된다. 따라서 이 테스트를 수행하는 방법을 배우는 작업으로 인해 자신의 자아에 대한 이해도 변경됩니다. 이 테스트를 적용하는 과정조차 관찰자의 발달 과정에 따라 달라지기 때문에 테스트는 기계적인 것과 거리가 멀고 항상 정확하지는 않습니다.
이를 명확히 하기 위해 이 실험을 수행할 때 발생하는 실제 문제 중 일부를 더 자세히 설명하고자 합니다. 우선, 우리가 다양한 대상을 보고 어떤 것이 자아와 더 유사한지 결정하려고 한다고 가정합니다. 어떤 경우에는 이것이 쉽고 실험은 소금 통 및 케첩 병 실험에서와 같이 명확한 결과를 얻습니다.

8 / MANY CULTURES, ONE MEASURE